From Singularities to Dynkin Diagrams
======================================

Arnold's ADE Classification

1. The Setup: Critical Points of Smooth Functions
---------------------------------------------------

Consider a smooth function :math:`f: \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}`. A point
:math:`x_0` is a **critical point** if all partial derivatives vanish:

.. math::

   \nabla f(x_0) = 0

The critical point is **non-degenerate** if the Hessian matrix

.. math::

   H_{ij} = \frac{\partial^2 f}{\partial x_i \partial x_j}(x_0)

has full rank (:math:`\det H \neq 0`). By the **Morse Lemma**, every
non-degenerate critical point can be brought to the normal form

.. math::

   f(x) = \pm x_1^2 \pm x_2^2 \pm \cdots \pm x_n^2

by a smooth change of coordinates. Non-degenerate critical points are
completely classified by a single integer (the index = number of minus signs),
and they are **stable**: small perturbations of :math:`f` don't change the
local picture.

The interesting story begins with **degenerate** critical points, where
:math:`\det H = 0`.

2. Equivalence of Singularities
---------------------------------

Two function germs :math:`f` and :math:`g` (functions defined near the origin
with :math:`f(0) = g(0) = 0`, :math:`\nabla f(0) = \nabla g(0) = 0`) are
**right-equivalent** if there exists a smooth change of coordinates
:math:`\phi` near 0 such that:

.. math::

   g(x) = f(\phi(x))

This is the natural notion of "same singularity" -- if you can deform the
domain to turn one function into the other, they have the same type.

**Example.** :math:`f(x,y) = x^3 + y^2` and :math:`g(x,y) = x^3 + 2y^2` are
right-equivalent (via :math:`\phi(x,y) = (x, y/\sqrt{2})`), but
:math:`f(x,y) = x^3 + y^2` and :math:`h(x,y) = x^4 + y^2` are not.

How do we prove inequivalence?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Showing that two singularities *are* equivalent is straightforward: exhibit the
coordinate change :math:`\phi`. But how can we be certain that *no* smooth
change of coordinates exists?

The answer is **invariants** -- quantities that are computable from :math:`f`
and that remain unchanged under *any* smooth coordinate substitution. If an
invariant differs between :math:`f` and :math:`g`, no coordinate change can
relate them.

**Invariant 1: The Milnor number.** The most basic invariant is the **Milnor
number** :math:`\mu`, defined as the dimension of the **local algebra** (also
called the Jacobian algebra):

.. math::

   \mu(f) = \dim_\mathbb{R} \frac{\mathcal{O}_n}{J(f)}, \qquad
   J(f) = \left\langle \frac{\partial f}{\partial x_1}, \ldots,
          \frac{\partial f}{\partial x_n} \right\rangle

Here :math:`\mathcal{O}_n` is the ring of smooth function germs at the origin,
and :math:`J(f)` is the ideal generated by the partial derivatives. The
quotient has finite dimension precisely when the singularity is *isolated*.

The Milnor number is invariant under coordinate changes because if
:math:`g = f \circ \phi`, the chain rule gives :math:`J(g) = J(f) \circ \phi`
(up to an invertible Jacobian factor), so the quotient algebras are isomorphic.

The ``mutation_game`` library can compute this:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> from sympy import symbols
   >>> from mutation_game import milnor_number, corank, classify
   >>> x, y = symbols('x y')
   >>> milnor_number(x**3 + y**2, (x, y))
   2
   >>> milnor_number(x**4 + y**2, (x, y))
   3

**Example.** For :math:`f = x^3 + y^2` (type :math:`A_2`):

.. math::

   J(f) = \langle 3x^2, 2y \rangle

The quotient :math:`\mathcal{O}_2 / \langle x^2, y \rangle` has basis
:math:`\{1, x\}`, so :math:`\mu = 2`.

For :math:`h = x^4 + y^2` (type :math:`A_3`):

.. math::

   J(h) = \langle 4x^3, 2y \rangle

The quotient :math:`\mathcal{O}_2 / \langle x^3, y \rangle` has basis
:math:`\{1, x, x^2\}`, so :math:`\mu = 3`.

Since :math:`\mu(f) = 2 \neq 3 = \mu(h)`, no smooth coordinate change can
transform :math:`f` into :math:`h`.

**Invariant 2: The corank.** The **corank** of a singularity is the number of
zero eigenvalues of the Hessian matrix at the critical point (equivalently,
:math:`n` minus the rank of :math:`H`). This is invariant because the rank of
the Hessian is preserved under smooth coordinate changes (which act on
:math:`H` by congruence: :math:`H \mapsto J^\top H J` where :math:`J` is the
Jacobian of :math:`\phi`, which is invertible).

The corank separates the families immediately:

- **Corank 1**: :math:`A_n` singularities (one degenerate direction)
- **Corank 2**: :math:`D_n` and :math:`E_n` singularities (two degenerate directions)

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> corank(x**3 + y**2, (x, y))    # A2: one degenerate direction
   1
   >>> corank(x**2*y + y**3, (x, y))  # D4: two degenerate directions
   2

**Invariant 3: The local algebra itself.** The most powerful invariant is the
full isomorphism class of the local algebra :math:`\mathcal{O}_n / J(f)`. The
**Mather--Yau theorem** (1982) states that for isolated singularities, this is
a *complete* invariant:

   *Two function germs* :math:`f` *and* :math:`g` *with isolated singularities
   are right-equivalent if and only if their local algebras are isomorphic as*
   :math:`\mathbb{R}`-*algebras.*

This is a deep result: it says the algebraic structure of the quotient ring
captures everything about the geometry of the singularity. The ADE normal
forms are mutually inequivalent because their local algebras are pairwise
non-isomorphic (distinct :math:`\mu` values, except :math:`D_n` and
:math:`A_n` at the same :math:`n`, which are separated by the corank).

The ``classify`` function automates the full classification:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> classify(x**3 + y**2, (x, y))
   'A2'
   >>> classify(x**2*y + y**3, (x, y))
   'D4'
   >>> classify(x**3 + y**4, (x, y))
   'E6'

How do we construct the coordinate change explicitly?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Knowing two singularities are equivalent (same invariants) doesn't hand us the
map :math:`\phi`. There are three main techniques for constructing it.

**Method 1: The homotopy method (Moser's path method).**

Given :math:`f` and :math:`g` with the same type, define a one-parameter
family:

.. math::

   F_t = (1-t) f + t g, \qquad t \in [0, 1]

We seek a family of diffeomorphisms :math:`\phi_t` satisfying
:math:`F_t \circ \phi_t = f` for all :math:`t`, with
:math:`\phi_0 = \text{id}`. If we can write:

.. math::

   g(x) - f(x) = \sum_{i=1}^n a_i(x) \frac{\partial F_t}{\partial x_i}(x)

then :math:`\dot{\phi}_t = -(a_1, \ldots, a_n)` defines a flow, and
integrating from :math:`t = 0` to :math:`t = 1` gives :math:`\phi = \phi_1`.

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> from mutation_game import homotopy_equivalence
   >>> from sympy import expand
   >>> f = x**3 + y**2
   >>> g = x**3 + 5*y**2
   >>> result = homotopy_equivalence(f, g, (x, y))
   >>> result['coordinate_change']
   {x: x, y: sqrt(5)*y/5}
   >>> expand(g.subs(y, result['coordinate_change'][y]))
   x**3 + y**2

The coordinate change :math:`\phi(x,y) = (x, y/\sqrt{5})` transforms
:math:`g` back into :math:`f`.

**Method 2: Jet determination (finite order Taylor matching).**

For finitely determined singularities, one eliminates higher-order terms
order by order via polynomial coordinate substitutions:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Type
     - Normal form
     - Determinacy
   * - :math:`A_n`
     - :math:`x^{n+1}`
     - :math:`(n+1)`-determined
   * - :math:`D_n`
     - :math:`x^2 y + y^{n-1}`
     - :math:`(n-1)`-determined
   * - :math:`E_6`
     - :math:`x^3 + y^4`
     - 4-determined
   * - :math:`E_7`
     - :math:`x^3 + xy^3`
     - 4-determined
   * - :math:`E_8`
     - :math:`x^3 + y^5`
     - 5-determined

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> from mutation_game import jet_reduce
   >>> result = jet_reduce(x**3 + x**4, x, 3)
   >>> result['normal_form']
   u**3
   >>> result['coordinate_change']    # x = u - u²/3 + u³/3 - ...
   -35*u**4/81 + u**3/3 - u**2/3 + u

**Method 3: The Splitting Lemma.**

Separates non-degenerate directions by completing the square:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> from mutation_game import splitting_lemma
   >>> result = splitting_lemma(x**2 + x*y**2 + y**4, (x, y))
   >>> result['quadratic_part']
   u0**2
   >>> result['residual']
   3*y**4/4
   >>> result['corank']
   1

The function :math:`x^2 + xy^2 + y^4` splits into :math:`u_0^2 + \frac{3}{4}y^4`,
separating the non-degenerate :math:`x`-direction from the :math:`A_3`
singularity in :math:`y`.

3. Simple Singularities
------------------------

A singularity is **simple** if a sufficiently small neighborhood of :math:`f`
in function space contains only finitely many equivalence classes of
singularities.

**Arnold's Theorem (1972).** *The simple singularities are exactly:*

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Type
     - Normal form
     - Milnor number :math:`\mu`
   * - :math:`A_n` (:math:`n \geq 1`)
     - :math:`x^{n+1}`
     - :math:`n`
   * - :math:`D_n` (:math:`n \geq 4`)
     - :math:`x^2 y + y^{n-1}`
     - :math:`n`
   * - :math:`E_6`
     - :math:`x^3 + y^4`
     - 6
   * - :math:`E_7`
     - :math:`x^3 + xy^3`
     - 7
   * - :math:`E_8`
     - :math:`x^3 + y^5`
     - 8

The Milnor number counts the number of non-degenerate critical points the
singularity splits into under a generic perturbation.

.. note::

   The normal forms are written in the minimal number of variables. In higher
   dimensions, add a non-degenerate quadratic:
   :math:`x_1^{n+1} \pm x_2^2 \pm \cdots \pm x_m^2`. This doesn't affect
   the classification (by the Splitting Lemma).

4. Why ADE? The Milnor Fiber and the Intersection Form
-------------------------------------------------------

The connection to Dynkin diagrams is through topology. Here we work in the
complex setting, considering :math:`f: \mathbb{C}^2 \to \mathbb{C}`.

The Milnor Fiber
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Given a singularity :math:`f` with :math:`f(0) = 0`, perturb it slightly to
get :math:`f_t` (a Morsification). The fiber

.. math::

   F_t = \{x \in B_\varepsilon : f_t(x) = \delta\}

is a smooth manifold called the **Milnor fiber**. For surface singularities in
:math:`\mathbb{C}^2`, it is a surface of genus :math:`g` with boundary, where
:math:`\mu` is the Milnor number.

Vanishing Cycles
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Each of the :math:`\mu` non-degenerate critical points of :math:`f_t`
contributes a **vanishing cycle**
:math:`\delta_i \in H_1(F_t, \mathbb{Z})` -- a loop that shrinks to a point
as :math:`t \to 0`. The :math:`\mu` vanishing cycles form a basis of
:math:`H_1(F_t, \mathbb{Z}) \cong \mathbb{Z}^\mu`.

The Intersection Form
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The first homology carries a natural **intersection form**:

.. math::

   \langle \delta_i, \delta_j \rangle = \begin{cases}
     -2 & \text{if } i = j \\
     0 \text{ or } 1 & \text{if } i \neq j
   \end{cases}

Defining :math:`C_{ij} = -\langle \delta_i, \delta_j \rangle` gives:

- :math:`C_{ii} = 2` for all :math:`i`
- :math:`C_{ij} = 0` or :math:`-1` for :math:`i \neq j`

**This is exactly a Cartan matrix of ADE type.** The vanishing cycles that
intersect are connected by an edge in the Dynkin diagram.

The Result
^^^^^^^^^^^

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Singularity
     - Normal form
     - Vanishing cycles
     - Intersection form
   * - :math:`A_n`
     - :math:`x^{n+1} + y^2`
     - :math:`n` cycles in a chain
     - :math:`A_n` Dynkin diagram
   * - :math:`D_n`
     - :math:`x^2 y + y^{n-1}`
     - :math:`n` cycles, chain + fork
     - :math:`D_n` Dynkin diagram
   * - :math:`E_6`
     - :math:`x^3 + y^4`
     - 6 cycles
     - :math:`E_6` Dynkin diagram
   * - :math:`E_7`
     - :math:`x^3 + xy^3`
     - 7 cycles
     - :math:`E_7` Dynkin diagram
   * - :math:`E_8`
     - :math:`x^3 + y^5`
     - 8 cycles
     - :math:`E_8` Dynkin diagram

The **monodromy** acts as a **Coxeter element** of the Weyl group -- a product
of all simple reflections :math:`s_1 s_2 \cdots s_n`. These are exactly the
mutation matrices from the mutation game.

5. Worked Example: A\ :sub:`n` in Detail
------------------------------------------

Take :math:`f(x, y) = x^{n+1} + y^2`. The origin is an isolated singularity
with :math:`\mu = n`.

Perturb to a Morse function:

.. math::

   f_t(x, y) = x^{n+1} - t_1 x^{n-1} - t_2 x^{n-2} - \cdots - t_n x + y^2

For generic small :math:`t`, this has :math:`n` non-degenerate critical points
arranged along the real :math:`x`-axis. Adjacent critical points have
vanishing cycles that intersect once; non-adjacent ones are disjoint. The
intersection graph is a **path** :math:`\delta_1 - \delta_2 - \cdots - \delta_n`,
which is exactly the :math:`A_n` Dynkin diagram.

The monodromy is the Coxeter element :math:`h = s_1 \circ s_2 \circ \cdots \circ s_n`,
where each :math:`s_i` is the Picard--Lefschetz reflection (= mutation).

6. Worked Example: D\ :sub:`n` in Detail
------------------------------------------

:math:`f(x, y) = x^2 y + y^{n-1}` for :math:`n \geq 4`. The origin is an
isolated singularity with :math:`\mu = n`. After Morsification, the :math:`n`
vanishing cycles arrange as a chain of :math:`n-2` cycles with two additional
cycles forking off the last node -- the :math:`D_n` Dynkin diagram.

7. The E-type Singularities
-----------------------------

The exceptional cases:

- **E6**: :math:`f = x^3 + y^4` -- six vanishing cycles in the :math:`E_6`
  pattern (chain of 5 with one branch off the third node)
- **E7**: :math:`f = x^3 + xy^3` -- seven vanishing cycles in the :math:`E_7`
  pattern
- **E8**: :math:`f = x^3 + y^5` -- eight vanishing cycles in the :math:`E_8`
  pattern. The most complex simple singularity.

8. Thom's Seven Catastrophes
------------------------------

Thom's catastrophe theory studies how families of functions depend on
**control parameters**. The **codimension** is the number of parameters in
the universal unfolding.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Type
     - Normal form
     - Codimension
     - Universal unfolding
   * - :math:`A_2`
     - :math:`x^3`
     - 1
     - :math:`x^3 + ax`
   * - :math:`A_3`
     - :math:`x^4`
     - 2
     - :math:`x^4 + ax^2 + bx`
   * - :math:`A_4`
     - :math:`x^5`
     - 3
     - :math:`x^5 + ax^3 + bx^2 + cx`
   * - :math:`A_5`
     - :math:`x^6`
     - 4
     - :math:`x^6 + ax^4 + bx^3 + cx^2 + dx`
   * - :math:`D_4^-`
     - :math:`x^3 - xy^2`
     - 3
     - :math:`x^3 - xy^2 + a(x^2+y^2) + bx + cy`
   * - :math:`D_4^+`
     - :math:`x^3 + xy^2`
     - 3
     - :math:`x^3 + xy^2 + a(x^2+y^2) + bx + cy`
   * - :math:`D_5`
     - :math:`x^2y + y^4`
     - 4
     - :math:`x^2y + y^4 + ay^2 + bx^2 + cy + dx`

In any generic family with **at most 4 control parameters**, only these seven
types appear. Their traditional names:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - ADE type
     - Catastrophe name
     - Codimension
     - Geometry
   * - :math:`A_2`
     - **Fold**
     - 1
     - Two sheets merging
   * - :math:`A_3`
     - **Cusp**
     - 2
     - Cusp of a caustic
   * - :math:`A_4`
     - **Swallowtail**
     - 3
     - Self-intersecting surface
   * - :math:`A_5`
     - **Butterfly**
     - 4
     - Butterfly-shaped bifurcation set
   * - :math:`D_4^-`
     - **Hyperbolic umbilic**
     - 3
     - Wave crests on shallow water
   * - :math:`D_4^+`
     - **Elliptic umbilic**
     - 3
     - Light focusing patterns
   * - :math:`D_5`
     - **Parabolic umbilic**
     - 4
     - Transition between hyperbolic and elliptic

The remaining ADE types have codimension :math:`\geq 5` and require special
tuning to produce. This is why Thom stopped at seven.

9. Summary: The Chain of Connections
--------------------------------------

.. math::

   \boxed{\text{Simple singularity}}
   \xrightarrow{\text{Morsification}}
   \boxed{\text{Vanishing cycles}}
   \xrightarrow{\text{Intersection form}}
   \boxed{\text{Cartan matrix}}
   \xleftarrow{\text{Mutation game}}
   \boxed{\text{Dynkin diagram}}

1. Start with a degenerate critical point of a smooth function [AGV1985]_
2. Perturb it to split into :math:`\mu` non-degenerate critical points
   [Milnor1968]_
3. Each critical point contributes a vanishing cycle in the Milnor fiber
4. The intersection numbers of vanishing cycles give the Cartan matrix
   [Brieskorn1968]_
5. The Cartan matrix is the same one from the mutation game on the Dynkin
   diagram [Slodowy1980]_
6. The monodromy = product of Picard--Lefschetz reflections = Coxeter element

For the role of catastrophe theory in this picture, see [Thom1975]_.

References
-----------

.. [AGV1985] V. I. Arnold, S. M. Gusein-Zade, A. N. Varchenko,
   *Singularities of Differentiable Maps*, Vol. I, Birkhauser, 1985.

.. [Thom1975] R. Thom, *Structural Stability and Morphogenesis*, Benjamin,
   1975.

.. [Milnor1968] J. W. Milnor, *Singular Points of Complex Hypersurfaces*,
   Annals of Mathematics Studies 61, Princeton, 1968.

.. [Brieskorn1968] E. Brieskorn, "Die Auflosung der rationalen Singularitaten
   holomorpher Abbildungen," *Math. Annalen* 178 (1968), 255--270.

.. [Slodowy1980] P. Slodowy, *Simple Singularities and Simple Algebraic
   Groups*, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 815, Springer, 1980.
